Hi, this is Scott. I
really appreciate our sponsors because
they make the show possible.
Today's show is sponsored by
developer express, become a UI
superhero with dev express controls
and libraries. Deliver elegant.net solutions
that address customer needs today
by leveraging your existing knowledge,
you can build next generation
touch enabled solutions for tomorrow,
you can download your free
30 day trial@dxdothanselminutes.com. That's dx.hanselminutes.com.
Hi, this is Scott Hanselman.
This is another episode of
Hansel minutes. And today I'm
talking with Eric Norman. He's the
chief instigator@purelyfunctional.tv. That's purely functional.tv.
Very nice top level domain
there. Hey, thanks a lot.
That's pretty cool. And there's
a ton of resources up
there. Video courses and courses
with free content. And there's
a whole section on getting
jobs around functional programming. You're
kind of building your, your
own portal here to introduce
people to functional programming specifically
as a career. That's right.
Thanks for making me feel
old by the way about
portals, but yeah, I'm, I'm
trying to help people who
want to get a job
in closure, transition their career
to functional programming and just
provide like a ramp for
that. Why do I want
to transition my career? Can
I have my cake and
eat it too? So there's
a lot of people out
there who have been doing
Java or some other language
and been unhappy with it.
You know, they are just
like, this is all there
is. And now with all
this like booming of new
languages, they actually have a
lot of choice and they
are, you know, older, they
have a family, so they
can't really risk a like
a pay cut. And so
there, there's a lot of
fear about changing careers at
this point in their life.
So I'm, I'm trying to
be there and, you know,
hold their hand and show
them that it is possible.
So why, why closure? Why
did you focus on closure
as your entry drug into
the functional world? So that's
a good question. I've always
been into lisp. I guess
I started back in college,
you know, 15 or 16
years ago, and I was
kind of a smug lisp
weenie using common lisp. And
then when closure came out,
I gave it a shot
and like haven't looked back.
So I just, I just
really like closure what I'm
going to parse something maybe
more than I need to.
You said smug. And I,
I think that it's, it's
okay to say that sometimes
People who aren't functional programmers
feel a little afraid to
get into functional programming, not
just because it's scary and
they have to figure out
what a monad is, but
that there's a certain amount
of, of barrier to entry
around the personalities of, of
the, or what may be
perceived as personalities in the
functional programming world. Do you
think that that's true? I,
I definitely see that the,
the perception, the perception is
there and I can see
why. So How do we
break that down? And why
is that perception there? Is
it just because mathematicians go
into functional programming or, you
know, how did we get
that, that stereotype and how
do we break through that
stereotype? Wow. I wish I
could break through the stereotype.
The, the reason I see
it's there is that functional
programming because it's more mathematical
has been much more target
of academic research. So a
lot of the people who
write stuff online who write
papers, they're actually researching Lino,
new computer science techniques and
concepts. And so they're, they're
just used to speaking in
a more academic way and
much less practical. They're not
even worried about the practical
at the moment. They're just
trying to get a paper
published. And so when you
read a blog post, it
could be someone who's like
exploring this stuff. They could
be a researcher and it
might seem like it's totally
inaccessible. Like they're using, you
know, half the words that
they use. You don't even
understand why it would take
you 10 years to read
up on all the stuff
that they know to get
to the point where they're
at. But the thing is
functional programming is, is very
practical and doesn't have to
reach those Heights of, you
know, novelty that you get
in the academic papers. Okay.
So I don't have to
be an academic. I don't
have to have a master's
degree if I want to
get started in thinking about
functional programming and I can
really do practical work. I
can, you know, people who
are listening might be doing
a text boxes over data,
you know, to a website
and they want to do
it in a different way
and maybe a better way
For sure. And one of
the things that closure has,
you know, just as an
example, is it's, it's just
got this pragmatic philosophy it's
built to be hosted on
the JVM. And one of
the reasons behind that was
to take advantage all of,
all of the JVM libraries
that are out there. So
it has really good inter-op.
So if you just need
to, you know, send some
web requests or read some
files off of your disc
or whatever, you can just
do it by calling into
Java and you don't have
to worry about, you know,
whether you've got the right
types and things like that,
like you would in some
functional languages. Do you think
that the, and this is
going to be kind of
a trick question, not a
trick question, I'm setting you
up here. Do you think
that we made a mistake
as a, as a community
or as a, as a
practice that maybe imperative programming
shouldn't have one and that
functional programming should evolve. It
should have been the thing
that became mainstream, that things
should be, it should be
inverted. Hmm. You're opening up
a can of worms. Well,
but it's, you know, an
opinion is an opinion and
it's a valid one. I
go, beta max was a
superior videotape format, but the
AHS one, but that doesn't
change the fact that beta
max was in fact better.
Yeah. But when you say
that about beta max, you
don't have a flame more
like ready to start. Well,
I don't want to start
a flame war. I want
to enable people who are
listening to make a decision
that maybe there's a better
world out there. I haven't
decided yet for myself. Maybe
the answer is somewhere in
between. Sure. Well, like all
joking aside. I think that
procedural is actually pretty a
pretty good model for how
things work. What I would
say is it's the object
oriented that is not so
great. That procedural is great
for a single threaded, you
know, just go through step
by step, get something done.
And you know, a lot
of my code is just
like that even in closure.
But what happens is once
you have multiple threads, you
actually want the language to
help you a lot more.
So you want immutable values.
You want pure functions, you
want some primitive, some concurrency
primitives to help you put
the, you know, you have
all these threads working. You
need to put the answer
back together once they're all
done. So you need something
to help do that. So
I would say that that
it's the object oriented where
you kind of put a
little bit of state in
every object and just like
make this big graph of
objects. I would say that
that was the mistake. Interesting.
And that's, that doesn't seem
nearly as controversial as I
think people would, would think.
So it sounds to me
like, if you want to
just, maybe we can back
up a little bit and
juxtapose, you know, functional programming
and nonfunctional programming. It sounds
like it all starts at
side effects. Like that's the
big argument. Yeah. State side
effects. And so like, just
to be clear, like I,
no one thinks that side
effects are bad. They're actually
necessary. Like if your program,
all I did was like
use the CPU and then
you never knew what happened.
It wouldn't be very useful,
but what's happened is that
we've realized that having side
effects all throughout your code,
that aren't necessary are actually
making it harder to reuse
your code. They're making it
harder to think about what
your code is going to
do by separating out the
side effect or the effect.
Let's not, you know, they're
not all side effects. Some
of them are, you know,
why you call the function,
but by separating it out
and having a pure calculation
over, over values, you, you
can actually do a lot
more reasoning. You can put
the calculation on different threads,
you can put it on
different machines. And so that's,
that's really the sort of
umbrella under which the functional
programming works. So State that
when people say that the
problems with nonfunctional languages are
our managing state, it's not
the state of the side
effects. It's the complexity that
comes from those state machines
that we end up managing
that, you know, you add
a Boolean, it's fine. Okay.
There's two States. Now you
add five or six bullions
and now it's this, this
Cartesian product, of course. Plexity.
Yeah, for sure. And when
you have something that is
supposed to read a value,
but it actually also counts
the number of reads or
it is supposed to send
a message, but it also
writes something to a local
variable or a global variable
and those things like you've
got you, can't separate them
out. And so you think
I'm just, I'm just sending
an email when you're also
changing all these other things.
And when you, when you
are actually just doing a
calculation, like let's say you're,
I mean, I don't think
anybody does this anymore. I
hope people don't. But when
I was writing, see back
in the day, like we
would reuse global variables, you
know, like, Oh, this, this
is an end. I need
an end. Let me just
use that one. And you
know, now it sounds, it
seems silly, but that's what,
that's what we did back
in the day. And, you
know, you would set it
to zero and then start
counting into it and then
you would be done with
it. And the other code
was just supposed to know,
like, don't touch that while
I'm working. Right. And those
kinds of assumptions, like they
require discipline. And if you
could turn that discipline into
just a constraint that the
language imposes on you, you
actually don't have to worry.
You can relax a lot
more. You can use that,
you know, that same construct
in different ways, you don't
have the mutability. So you're,
you're able to count lots
of different stuff instead of
just the one loop that
you had, that's supposed to
be counting, you know, you
can count different things at
the same time. And there's
There's so there's inputs and
there's outputs. But I understand
that. One of the things
that we forget about when
we're writing kind of declarative
code or parative code or
parental program or programmatic step-by-step
code is a hidden inputs.
And the things that are
not explicitly called out as
an input. Like, for example,
if you knew up a
date in the middle of
a function, even, you know,
that date is going to
change, it's now become a
hidden input, but it's buried
10 lines in somewhere. And
because you're not explicit about
it, it's, it's a dependency
in there that you're not
realizing that part to test.
Yeah, exactly. It's, it's super
hard to test because every
time you call it, it's
a different time. And yeah.
So in a functional world,
what you would do is
you would pass that date
in. And so then you
could construct the date in
your test, however you want.
And that way, you know,
your test is always gonna
do the same thing. So
can that be built into
the language too? Like, so
you could be forced not
to do that. Is that
how we do end up
doing things like inversion of
control and dependency injection in
nonfunctional languages? Yeah. So the
way that you would do
that is using the type
system. So if you had
a Haskell style type system
that includes type inference and
concept of IO, that's part
of the type system. And
also part of, part of
the language itself, IO is
supposed to capture all of
that. You know, whether it's,
you know, IO, like I
slash O input output. So
anything coming off the network,
writing to disk, anything that
the like process in memory
doesn't control also the time
the clock is another input.
So in Haskell, the way
it works is if you
want to do something like
that, you have to be
very explicit and you actually
have to pass that value
in from the top. So
you can, you can't just
like in the middle of
a function, that's supposed to
be, you know, summing some
numbers, grab a grab a
time or a random number
or something like that. Okay.
Is that what's called a
pure function. Oh, good question.
So yeah, pure function is
a function that is only
a calculation from the arguments
and all it does is
return the value. Okay. So
then if all the inputs
are declared or called out
as inputs and nothing's hidden,
then that is pure or
quote unquote superior to one
that might have hidden inputs
or outputs. Right, Right. Superior
in, in the way that
you, you get some guarantees.
Right. You know that every
time I call this, I'm
going to get the same
answer back and I can
call it as many times
as I want. I'm not
gonna, I'm not going to
have effects on the world.
Right. So, you know, the
classic example is it's firing
a missile. You can't call
that function twice cause it'll
shoot off two missiles. And
so you want to have
a function that say calculates
all the, you know, the
number of missiles that it
needs to fire separate from
actually firing them. Okay. Well,
if I know if I
know about side effects, if
I know about what's bad
and what's good and what's
pure and what's impure from
a functional perspective, couldn't I
go and write Java or
C sharp as if I
were writing a functional programming
language, I could make sure
all my inputs and outputs
are called out. I could
change my style. And would
I be turning it into
a functional programming language? Or
would I just be leaning
in that direction? So you
can definitely do that. A
lot of people have tried.
So the, there are success
stories in that area, especially
now that Java has Lambdas,
it's a little bit easier
to, to write those kinds
of things. What I've heard
though from the like non
success stories is that it's
more code, right? Cause you're,
you're actually going to be
writing around the idioms that
have been like optimized in
Java. And then also your
teammates are going to be
mad because, because they've learned
all these other idioms and
style stylistic choices, and now
you're breaking all of that
and they don't know what
your code is supposed to
be doing anymore. You know,
they don't want to take
the time to learn all
this stuff that, you know.
Okay. So then that implies
that a functional programming language
is one that is encouraging
me or pointing me in
that direction to avoid side
effects and to avoid impure
functions without it messing up,
everyone else's flow. It's right.
It's, it's more a matter
of defaults. And like you
said, like pushing you in
that direction, for instance, enclosure,
you know, writing a function
is really easy. All the
immutable, all the data structures
are immutable by default. So
you can get that. And
there's no guarantee that your
function is pure, but it's
super easy to write one
that's pure because the, you
know, the functions are very
short and you know, it's
just easy to see that
you're not calling something like
a print line or something.
There's a great blog by
Chris Jenkins about functional programming.
And in it, they say
that a, a functional programming
language is actively hostile to
side-effects. Yeah. That might Be
a good way to put
it. Yeah. I like to
think of it. Like, so
if you want to go
to the store and buy
some stuff, right, you're going
grocery shopping and you let's
say you, you need two
gallons of milk. So you
go to the store. Once
you buy a gallon of
milk, you come home and
then you go back to
the store and you buy
a second gallon of milk
and come home. Like, if
all you had was a
function like buy or a
method, go buy a gallon
of milk. Like that's how
you would have to buy
two things. Right. But what
you could do instead is
sit at home and on
a piece of paper, you
make a list and you're
doing all this calculation in
your head, like, what do
I need? And you're making
a note, you're making like
a representation of all the
stuff you want to buy.
And then you have a
function that takes you to
the store and you give
it a list and it
will just run through the
list and buy everything on
your list. And so that
separate calculation is something we
do every day in our
lives. But somehow in computer
programming, we like mix it
all up. And you're like,
well, I'm right in the
middle of this loop. I
might as well just like
fire off this email instead
of calculating all the emails
I'm going to need ahead
of time. Right. Okay. So
when I let's talk about
this in the context of
getting a job, this isn't
a matter of just like
learn, you know, go and
read about closure and say,
I'm going to learn all
of the, the key words.
It's how do you express
as you're trying to go
out there and transition your
job, that you really understand
this from an idiomatic perspective
that you, you understand what
it means to be functional,
as opposed to just being
able to hack something together.
That's a really good question.
So when, so understanding this
idea of pure functions is
super important. You'll probably, if
you're in an interview, you
would probably be asked to
explain, you know, what's a
side effect, what is a
pure function? Oh, good. I'm
glad they listened to this
show. Yeah. Now, now, you
know, you got your job,
right? The, the other thing
is that when you, when
you start to like build
more complex systems and something
that just calculates one value,
you start to build like
data transformation pipelines. And it's
kind of like when you're
doing bash scripting on the
command line where you're piping
commands together, you, you know,
you have one function, that's
calculating something. And then another
thing is taking that value
that it calculated and turning
it into something else. And
then another thing that's turning
then at the end you
can take that and maybe
just run a loop over
it and like, you know,
send off your emails or
whatever you're doing. And so
that's another kind of milestone
on your journey when you're,
when you're becoming a functional
programmer. So I would talk
about that at the interview.
The next thing is, is
getting to higher order programming.
And that means functions that
take functions as arguments. And
so, because you're using pure
functions, you actually feel very
safe just giving your function
to another function, to run
for you. And this is
often called dependency injection in
the object oriented world, except
you're not injecting a, an
object, a piece of state
with methods, you're injecting the
function. So you might say,
Hey, I have a list.
Give me a new list,
but with all the even
numbers removed, right? And so
you're passing in to the
filter function. If you want,
all the even numbers removed,
you would pass in the
odd, the odd predicate. So
an, a function that returns
true. If the number is
odd and so filter odd
and then your list and
you get back all of,
you know, a list, a
new list, cause it's immutable.
So a new list of
only the odd numbers. And
so w once you start
thinking, in terms of that,
you, you realize that there
aren't that many useful shapes
of data, you know, and
there's like ordered lists, there's
associative data structures, like hash
maps, dictionaries, where you have
a key value. And, and,
and then there's this, basically
it there's sets, which are
like bags of stuff, non
ordered. And then there, each
item is unique. So when
I hear this word predicate,
and I hear all these
different kind of computer sciency
words, those are the ones
I think that scare people
off. Like we said, right.
But it predicates, like it's
like Phil, it's like a
filter criteria, right? Like that's
the thing that returns true
or false. And then you
use it to filter lists
of things. That's right. It's
just a regular function, a
pure function that will take
an argument and return to
our false. So it does
some, some check on the
argument. So you could have
a function called OD that
takes a number or integer,
and it returns true. If
it's an odd number, you
could have one that called
even that returns true. If
it's even, so you can
then pass this into a
function that expects a predicate,
like filter a filter will
take a sequence or some
collection and return a new
collection with all this with
only keeping the stuff that
passes the predicate. So they
have a list of numbers
and you pass it to
filter with the odd predicate,
you'll get a new list
of numbers, only the odd
numbers in it. And because
there's only certain shapes of
data. So filter works on
a sequence, right? And then
there's like associative shapes. So
sequences have an order associated,
doesn't have an order, but
it has like this relationship
between the key value, keys
and values, and then there's
sets, which are just collections
with no order, but you
can check if something is
in there and you can
also like put the same
thing in twice. And it
only gets put in once.
And because there's only these
certain shapes, you just learn
a bunch of these higher
order functions that operate on
the shapes and put them
in a pipeline. And you're,
you're just piping stuff through.
I mean, I guess it's
kind of like, you know,
if your audience is familiar
with some of the Unix
commands, like the early Unix
commands where, you know, LS
just lists all the files
in the directory, one on
each line, and then you
grip it and it shows
you all the ones that
match, and then you, you
pipe it to something else
and, you know, maybe you
sort them, and then you
count them, you know, you
can do all sorts of
stuff with them and you
you're just chaining up these
commands together. Right. That's a
really clean way to explain
it to people like LS
doesn't change anything. It never
LS is guaranteed to never
change stuff. Right. And grip
doesn't change stuff either. Right.
All it does is in
lines and then only writes
out a subset of those
lines. Okay. So then this
kind of brings us to
function composition, where I go
and take five or six
functions and OCHIN set and
grip and, and G you
know, Jason C or whatever,
and combine them, and then
I could make them their
own function and then combine
that. And then now you're,
now you're building stuff up,
except you're doing it with
pieces of functions and functions
of functions, as opposed to,
as I'd like to say
multiple nested for loops. Right.
Which is what it ends
up being in a, in,
in nonfunctional. Exactly. I mean,
because what happens in Unix
is all you really have
are lines of text, right?
Like that's what everything understands.
So it's very flat. If
you need to do anything
more sophisticated than just, you
know, read it as text,
maybe like it's a Jason
per line. Well, then you
need another like, program that
can go in and read
the line of Jason and
you, like, I don't know.
I don't even know how
you do this in Unix,
but you need to run
that command for every line.
And then inside that it's
like, now it's nested. So
you have to do all
this stuff inside of that.
And it gets really complicated,
which is why in a
functional language, you will get
more nesting in your data
structure. But because you're operating
at a higher order, you're
often able to, I guess,
Keep the pipeline flat is
how, how you'd think of
it. Very cool. So you
can go to purely functional.tv,
which is Eric's website, and
he's got video courses. He's
got a guide that he
can, you can get on
his mailing list. There's a
whole section on job resources
for both Haskell and closure.
And you can basically get
onto the newsletter to start
and check out some of
his great video courses. He's
got a whole system and
the whole focus of your
website. I really liked this
because rather than just saying,
here's a bunch of videos,
here's a bunch of stuff.
Your focus is, if you
want to move your career,
you want to change your
job from doing imperative programming
to functional programming. You're basically
setting people up for success
with that, with that being
the goal. Yeah. And now,
now you should understand the
purely in the functional, it's
like a play on words.
That's all I talk about
is functional and it's pure,
and yeah, there you go.
That's great. And I'm going
to put links to all
of this in the show
notes, as well as some
of the great free courses.
He's got like 13 hours
of great free courses about
closure dot test and data
modeling and all kinds of
stuff. So you can see
his style of, of teaching.
And if you check it
out, maybe purchase some things.
Thanks so much for chatting
with me today. Thanks so
much, Scott. This has been
another episode of Hanselminutes and
we'll see you again next
week.